1. Linux is a Multi-User System
   Linux is designed to allow multiple users to use the system simultaneously.
   Each user has a username and unique UID (user ID).
   Users are grouped into groups, which also have a GID (group ID).
   Every file and directory in Linux is owned by a user and a group.

2. Basic Permissions

Every file or directory has 3 types of permissions for 3 classes of users:

Class	Description
Owner (u)	The user who owns the file
Group (g)	Users in the file’s group
Others (o)	Everyone else

Permission	     Meaning
r	Read     →   can view file contents or list directory
w	Write    →   can modify file or add/remove files in directory
x	Execute  →   can run file as a program or enter directory

3. Viewing Permissions
   Use ls -l:
   ls -l file.txt

Example output:
-rw-r--r-- 1 aashika users 1024 Nov 10 10:00 file.txt

Breaking it down:

-rw-r--r-- → permissions

- → regular file (d for directory, l for link)

rw- → owner has read + write

r-- → group has read only

r-- → others have read only

1 → number of hard links

aashika → owner

users → group

1024 → file size in bytes

Nov 10 10:00 → last modified date

file.txt → filename

File owners and group owners
---------------------------
File: file.txt
Permissions: -rw-r-----  
Owner: aashika  
Group: users

Breakdown:
- rw- (owner: aashika) → read + write  
- r-- (group: users) → read only  
- --- (others) → no access

Owner → usually creator of the file; has the most control
Group owner → group of users with shared access
Others → everyone else
Permissions for each are separate: owner, group, others

The first character indicates file type:

Symbol	  File Type      	          Description
-	       Regular file	     Normal file containing data, text, or program
d	       Directory	         Folder containing other files or directories
l	       Symbolic link	     Pointer to another file or directory
c	       Character device	   Device file for character-based devices (keyboard, mouse)
b	       Block device	       Device file for block-based devices (hard disk, USB)
p	       Named pipe (FIFO)   Special file for inter-process communication
s	       Socket	             Used for network communication between processes

Permissions:
-----------

character                    Effect on Files                               Effect on Directories
r                         file can be read                            directory's content can be listed
w                         file can be modified                        directory's content can be modified
                                                                      (create new files,rename files/folders)
                                                                       but only if the executable attribute is also set
x                         file can be treated as a program             allows a directory to be entered or 
                          to be executed                               "cd"ed in
-                         file cannot be read ,modified, or executed   directory contents cannot be shown,
                          ,file cannot bre read ,modified,             modified or cd'ed into depending on the 
                           or executed depending on                    location of the -charachter                                         
                           location of the character
                      

chmod:  chmod mode file
------
To change the permissions of a file or directory,we can use the chmod command.

To use chmod to alter permissions, we need to tell it:
who we are changing permissions for
what changes are we making? Adding> Removing?
which permissions are we setting?

1.Who
     - u -user(the owner of the file)
     - g -group(members of the group the file belongs to)
     - o -others(the world)
     - a -all of the above

2.What
     - minus  -removes the permission
     + plus   -grants the permission
     = equals -set a permission and removes others

3.Which
     r-the read permission
     w-the write permission
     x-the execute permission

     eg: rw-r--r--
        chmod g+w file.txt
        rw-rw-rr--

      eg: rw-rw-r--
         chmod a-w file.txt
         r--r--r--

      eg: rw-rw-r--
         chmod u+x file.txt
         rwx-rw-r--

      eg: rwxrwxr--
          chmod a=r file.txt
          r--r--r--

chmod octals
------------
chmod also supports another way of representing permission patterns : octal numbers
Each digit in an octal number represents 3 binary digits

Octal   Binary  File mode
0        000      ---
1        001      --x
2        010      -w-
3        011      -wx 
4        100      r--
5        101      r-x
6        110      rw-
7        111      rwx

eg: chmod 755 file.txt
    rwxr-xr-x

su:
---
su stands for substitute user or switch user.
It’s a command used to switch from the current user to another user in the system, usually the root user.

su -username  
su	Switch user or root	 Target user’s password	   Full shell as new user

Root User:
---------
The root user can run any command and access any file on the machine ,regardless of the file's actual owner.
The root user has  tons of power and could easily damage or even destroy the system by running the wrong commands.
For this reason,Ubuntu locks the root user by default.

sudo
-----
Even if the root user is locked by default,we can still run specific commands as the root user
by using the sudo command.

Individual users are granted an "allowed " list of commands they can run as the super user.
To run a command as the root user, prefix it with sudo.
You will then need to enter the password for your account.
For example to update Ubuntu, I would need to run apt update.However, I can't do this as my "regular" user
as it impacts all users.
              -----------------
Instead run  | sudo apt update |
              -----------------

Chown
-----
This command is used to change the owner and/ or the group owner of a specific file or directory.
eg:chown kitty file.txt 

chown stands for change owner.
It is used to change the owner and/or group of a file or directory.
Only the root user or a user with sudo privileges can change ownership.

2. Basic Syntax
chown [OPTIONS] NEW_OWNER[:NEW_GROUP] FILE

Part	                       Meaning
NEW_OWNER	          The username of the new owner
NEW_GROUP	Optional. The new group name (after :)
FILE	File or directory whose ownership you want to change

3. Examples
(a) Change only owner
   sudo chown alice file.txt

   Changes owner to alice
   Group remains the same

   ls -l file.txt
  -rw-r--r-- 1 alice users 1024 Nov 10 10:00 file.txt

(b) Change only group
   sudo chown :admin file.txt

  Changes group to admin
  Owner remains the same

  ls -l file.txt
  -rw-r--r-- 1 alice admin 1024 Nov 10 10:00 file.txt

(c) Change owner and group together
   sudo chown alice:admin file.txt
   Owner → alice
   Group → admin

(d) Change ownership recursively (directories)
   sudo chown -R alice:admin Documents/
   -R → recursive → applies to all files and subdirectories in Documents/

(e) Verify ownership
   ls -l file.txt

Output format:
-rw-r--r-- 1 alice admin 1024 Nov 10 10:00 file.txt
  First column → permissions
  Owner → alice
  Group → admin

4. Key Points
   Only root or sudo users can change ownership.
   Changing owner does not affect permissions (r, w, x remain same).
   Changing group allows users in that group to access the file as per group permissions

   Working with group demos:
   ------------------------
   Create a New Group
   Command:
         sudo groupadd developers
   This creates a new group called developers.
   You can confirm it with:

   getent group developers
           or
   cat /etc/group | grep developers
  Output example:
        developers:x:1002:

   developers → group name
   x → password placeholder
   1002 → group ID (GID)
   (blank) → no members yet
2. Add Users to the Group
   There are two ways:
  (a) Add an existing user
    sudo usermod -aG developers aashika
  -aG → append the user to the supplementary group (important!)
   developers → group name
    aashika → username

Note: Don’t forget the -a — without it, the user is removed from all other groups!

Check if it worked:
id aashika
Example output:
uid=1001(aashika) gid=1001(aashika) groups=1001(aashika),27(sudo),1002(developers)

(b) Add a new user directly to the group
sudo useradd -m -G developers rashmi
  -m → create home directory
  -G developers → adds the user to developers group
3. Check Group Members
   To list users in a group:
   getent group developers
   Example output: developers:x:1002:aashika,rashmi
 It shows all members of the developers group.

4. Remove User from Group
   sudo gpasswd -d aashika developers
  Output:
  Removing user aashika from group developers

5. Delete a Group (optional)
  sudo groupdel developers

Summary
Task	                                       Command
Create a group	                        sudo groupadd groupname
Add user to group	                     sudo usermod -aG groupname username
Create user in group	                  sudo useradd -m -G groupname username
Check group members	                  getent group groupname
Remove user from group	               sudo gpasswd -d username groupname
Delete group	                        sudo groupdel groupname

Let’s go through how both users can work together in a group — step by step, clearly explained.

1. Create the Group
   sudo groupadd projectteam
   This creates a group called projectteam.

2. Add Both Users to the Group
   sudo usermod -aG projectteam aashika
   sudo usermod -aG projectteam cherry

   Now check if they are members:
   getent group projectteam

  Output:
    projectteam:x:1003:aashika,cherry

 3. Create a Shared Folder
   Let’s make a folder for them to work together:
   sudo mkdir /home/shared_project
   
   Now give that folder to the group:
   sudo chown :projectteam /home/shared_project

  This means:
    Owner → (root or whoever created it)
    Group → projectteam

  Check:
    ls -ld /home/shared_project
   Output:
     drwxr-xr-x 2 root projectteam 4096 Nov 10 15:30 /home/shared_project

 4. Give Group Permissions
   To let both aashika and cherry read/write inside:

   sudo chmod 770 /home/shared_project

  770 means:
   Owner → full access (rwx)
   Group → full access (rwx)
  Others → no access
Now the directory looks like:
drwxrwx--- 2 root projectteam 4096 Nov 10 15:30 /home/shared_project
5. How Aashika Works

Login as aashika:

su - aashika
cd /home/shared_project
touch notes.txt
echo "Project details by Aashika" > notes.txt
ls -l

Output:
-rw-rw---- 1 aashika projectteam 25 Nov 10 15:32 notes.txt

6. How Cherry Works

Now login as cherry:

su - cherry
cd /home/shared_project
cat notes.txt

Cherry will see:
Project details by Aashika

Cherry can also edit or add:
echo "Cherry added more info" >> notes.txt


Now both users are collaborating on the same file because they share the same group (projectteam) and have group write permission.

Step	                                           Command	                                                   Description
Create group	                               sudo groupadd projectteam	                                  New shared group
Add users	                                  sudo usermod -aG projectteam aashika
                                              sudo usermod -aG projectteam cherry	                       Add both users
Create shared folder	                         sudo mkdir /home/shared_project	                             Common workspace
Change group ownership	                      sudo chown :projectteam /home/shared_project	              Assign to group
Give permissions	                            sudo chmod 770 /home/shared_project	                       Group can read/write
Work inside folder	                          su - aashika / su - cherry	                                Both can collaborate

